---
title: 2.2 BIDS Structure
draft: false
tags:
  - BIDS
  - mri
---
BIDS stands for the `B`rain `I`maging `D`ata `S`tructure, which is a simple and intuitive way to organize and describe your data. The whole specification can be found from the [official website](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). Here are some excerption from the official website. 

Before we go into details, let's clarify several important terms. 

1.  **Dataset** - a set of neuroimaging and behavioral data acquired for a purpose of a particular study.     
2.  **Subject** - a person or animal participating in the study. Used interchangeably with term **Participant**.    
3.  **Session** - a logical grouping of neuroimaging and behavioral data consistent across subjects. In general, subjects will stay in the scanner during one session.     
4.  **Sample** - a sample pertaining to a subject such as tissue, primary cell or cell-free sample. The `sample-<label>` key/value pair is used to distinguish between different samples from the same subject.   
5.  **Data type** - a functional group of different types of data. BIDS defines the following data types:
    1.  `func` (task based and resting state functional MRI)
    2.  `dwi` (diffusion weighted imaging)
    3.  `fmap` (field inhomogeneity mapping data such as field maps)
    4.  `anat` (structural imaging such as T1, T2, PD, and so on)
    5.  `perf` (perfusion)
    6.  `meg` (magnetoencephalography)
    7.  `eeg` (electroencephalography)
    8.  `ieeg` (intracranial electroencephalography)
    9.  `beh` (behavioral)
    10.  `pet` (positron emission tomography)
    11.  `micr` (microscopy)
    Data files are contained in a directory named for the data type. In raw datasets, the data type directory is nested inside subject and (optionally) session directories.
6.  **Task** - a set of structured activities performed by the participant. Tasks are usually accompanied by stimuli and responses, and can greatly vary in complexity.
7.  **Event** - something that happens or may be perceived by a test subject as happening at a particular instant during the recording. Events are most commonly associated with on- or offset of stimulus presentations, or with the distinct marker of on- or offset of a subject's response or motor action.
8.  **Run** - an uninterrupted repetition of data acquisition that has the same acquisition parameters and task. Run is a synonym of a data acquisition. 
9.  **`<index>`** - a nonnegative integer, possibly prefixed with arbitrary number of 0s for consistent indentation, for example, it is `01` in `run-01` following `run-<index>` specification. 
10.  **`<label>`** - an alphanumeric value, possibly prefixed with arbitrary number of 0s for consistent indentation, for example, it is `rest` in `task-rest` following `task-<label>` specification. Note that labels MUST not collide when casing is ignored (see [Case collision intolerance](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#case-collision-intolerance)).
11.  **`suffix`** - an alphanumeric value, located after the `key-value_` pairs (thus after the final `_`), right before the **File extension**, for example, it is `eeg` in `sub-05_task-matchingpennies_eeg.vhdr`.

## File name structure

A filename consists of a chain of _entities_, or key-value pairs, a _suffix_ and an _extension_. Two prominent examples of entities are `subject` and `session`.

For a data file that was collected in a given `session` from a given `subject`, the filename MUST begin with the string `sub-<label>_ses-<label>`. If the `session` level is omitted in the folder structure, the filename MUST begin with the string `sub-<label>`, without `ses-<label>`.

Note that `sub-<label>` corresponds to the `subject` entity because it has the `sub-` "key" and`<label>` "value", where `<label>` would in a real data file correspond to a unique identifier of that subject, such as `01`. The same holds for the `session` entity with its `ses-` key and its `<label>` value.

The extra session layer (at least one `/ses-<label>` subfolder) SHOULD be added for all subjects if at least one subject in the dataset has more than one session. If a `/ses-<label>` subfolder is included as part of the directory hierarchy, then the same `ses-<label>` key/value pair MUST also be included as part of the filenames themselves. Acquisition time of session can be defined in the sessions file.

A chain of entities, followed by a suffix, connected by underscores (`_`) produces a human readable filename, such as `sub-01_task-rest_eeg.edf`. 

Entities within a filename MUST be unique. For example, the following filename is not valid because it uses the `acq` entity twice: `sub-01_acq-laser_acq-uneven_electrodes.tsv`

A summary of all entities in BIDS and the order in which they MUST be specified is available in the [entity table](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/04-entity-table.html) in the official website appendix.

### Entity-linked file collections

An entity-linked file collection is a set of files that are related to each other based on a repetitive acquisition of sequential data by changing acquisition parameters one (or multiple) at a time or by being inherent components of the same data. Entity-linked collections are identified by a common suffix, indicating the group of files that should be considered a logical unit. Within each collection, files MUST be distinguished from each other by at least one entity (for example, `echo`) that corresponds to an altered acquisition parameter (`EchoTime`) or that defines a component relationship (for example, `part`). 

## Source vs. raw vs. derived data

BIDS was originally designed to describe and apply consistent naming conventions to raw (unprocessed or minimally processed due to file format conversion) data. During analysis such data will be transformed and partial as well as final results will be saved. Derivatives of the raw data (other than products of DICOM to NIfTI conversion) MUST be kept separate from the raw data. This way one can protect the raw data from accidental changes by file permissions. 

Similar rules apply to source data, which is defined as data before harmonization, reconstruction, and/or file format conversion (for example, E-Prime event logs or DICOM files). Storing actual source files with the data is preferred over links to external source repositories to maximize long term preservation, which would suffer if an external repository would not be available anymore. This specification currently does not go into the details of recommending a particular naming scheme for including different types of source data (such as the raw event logs or parameter files, before conversion to BIDS). However, in the case that these data are to be included:

1.  These data MUST be kept in separate `sourcedata` folder with a similar folder structure as presented below for the BIDS-managed data. For example: `sourcedata/sub-01/ses-pre/func/sub-01_ses-pre_task-rest_bold.dicom.tgz` or `sourcedata/sub-01/ses-pre/func/MyEvent.sce`.

2.  A README file SHOULD be found at the root of the `sourcedata` folder or the `derivatives` folder, or both. This file should describe the nature of the raw data or the derived data. We RECOMMEND including the PDF print-out with the actual sequence parameters generated by the scanner in the `sourcedata` folder.

Alternatively one can organize their data in the following way

```
└─ my_dataset-1/
   ├─ sourcedata/
   │  ├─ sub-01/
   │  ├─ sub-02/
   │  └─ ... 
   ├─ ... 
   └─ derivatives/
      ├─ pipeline_1/
      ├─ pipeline_2/
      └─ ... 

```


### Storage of derived datasets

Derivatives can be stored/distributed in two ways:

1.  Under a `derivatives/` subfolder in the root of the source BIDS dataset folder to make a clear distinction between raw data and results of data processing. A data processing pipeline will typically have a dedicated directory under which it stores all of its outputs. Different components of a pipeline can, however, also be stored under different subfolders. There are few restrictions on the directory names; it is RECOMMENDED to use the format `<pipeline>-<variant>` in cases where it is anticipated that the same pipeline will output more than one variant (for example, `AFNI-blurring` and `AFNI-noblurring`). For the sake of consistency, the subfolder name SHOULD be the `GeneratedBy.Name` field in `data_description.json`, optionally followed by a hyphen and a suffix (see [Derived dataset and pipeline description](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#derived-dataset-and-pipeline-description)).
    
    Example of derivatives with one directory per pipeline:
    
    ```
    <dataset>/derivatives/fmriprep-v1.4.1/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/vbm/sub-0001
    
    ```
    
    Example of a pipeline with split derivative directories:
    
    ```
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-preproc/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-stats/sub-0001
    
    ```
    
    Example of a pipeline with nested derivative directories:
    
    ```
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-preproc/sub-0001
    <dataset>/derivatives/spm-preproc/derivatives/spm-stats/sub-0001
    
    ```
    
2.  As a standalone dataset independent of the source (raw or derived) BIDS dataset. This way of specifying derivatives is particularly useful when the source dataset is provided with read-only access, for publishing derivatives as independent bodies of work, or for describing derivatives that were created from more than one source dataset. The `sourcedata/` subdirectory MAY be used to include the source dataset(s) that were used to generate the derivatives. Likewise, any code used to generate the derivatives from the source data MAY be included in the `code/` subdirectory.
    
    Example of a derivative dataset including the raw dataset as source:
    

```
└─ my_processed_data/
   ├─ code/
   │  ├─ processing_pipeline-1.0.0.img 
   │  ├─ hpc_submitter.sh 
   │  └─ ... 
   ├─ sourcedata/
   │  ├─ sub-01/
   │  ├─ sub-02/
   │  └─ ... 
   ├─ sub-01/
   ├─ sub-02/
   └─ ... 

```

## File Formation specification

### Imaging files

All imaging data MUST be stored using the NIfTI file format. We RECOMMEND using compressed NIfTI files (.nii.gz), either version 1.0 or 2.0. Imaging data SHOULD be converted to the NIfTI format using a tool that provides as much of the NIfTI header information (such as orientation and slice timing information) as possible. Since the NIfTI standard offers limited support for the various image acquisition parameters available in DICOM files, we RECOMMEND that users provide additional meta information extracted from DICOM files in a sidecar JSON file (with the same filename as the `.nii[.gz]` file, but with a `.json` extension). Extraction of BIDS compatible metadata can be performed using [dcm2niix](https://github.com/rordenlab/dcm2niix) and [dicm2nii](https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/42997-xiangruili-dicm2nii) DICOM to NIfTI converters. The [BIDS-validator](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-validator) will check for conflicts between the JSON file and the data recorded in the NIfTI header.

### Tabular files

Tabular data MUST be saved as tab delimited values (`.tsv`) files, that is, CSV files where commas are replaced by tabs. Tabs MUST be true tab characters and MUST NOT be a series of space characters. Each TSV file MUST start with a header line listing the names of all columns (with the exception of [physiological and other continuous recordings](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/06-physiological-and-other-continuous-recordings.html)). Names MUST be separated with tabs. It is RECOMMENDED that the column names in the header of the TSV file are written in [`snake_case`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) with the first letter in lower case (for example, `variable_name`, not `Variable_name`). String values containing tabs MUST be escaped using double quotes. Missing and non-applicable values MUST be coded as `n/a`. Numerical values MUST employ the dot (`.`) as decimal separator and MAY be specified in scientific notation, using `e` or `E` to separate the significand from the exponent. TSV files MUST be in UTF-8 encoding.

Example:

```
onset   duration    response_time   correct stop_trial  go_trial
200 200 0   n/a n/a n/a

```


### Key/value files (dictionaries)

JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) files MUST be used for storing key/value pairs. JSON files MUST be in UTF-8 encoding. Extensive documentation of the format can be found at [https://www.json.org/](https://www.json.org/), and at [https://tools.ietf.org/html/std90](https://tools.ietf.org/html/std90). Several editors have built-in support for JSON syntax highlighting that aids manual creation of such files. An online editor for JSON with built-in validation is available at [https://jsoneditoronline.org](https://jsoneditoronline.org/). It is RECOMMENDED that keys in a JSON file are written in [CamelCase](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_case) with the first letter in upper case (for example, `SamplingFrequency`, not `samplingFrequency`). Note however, when a JSON file is used as an accompanying sidecar file for a [TSV file](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#tabular-files), the keys linking a TSV column with their description in the JSON file need to follow the exact formatting as in the TSV file.

Example of a hypothetical `*_bold.json` file, accompanying a `*_bold.nii` file:

```
{
  "RepetitionTime": 3,
  "Instruction": "Lie still and keep your eyes open"
}

```

Example of a hypothetical `*_events.json` file, accompanying an `*_events.tsv` file. Note that the JSON file contains a key describing an _arbitrary_ column `stim_presentation_side` in the TSV file it accompanies. 

```
{
  "stim_presentation_side": {
    "Levels": {
      "1": "stimulus presented on LEFT side",
      "2": "stimulus presented on RIGHT side"
    }
  }
}

```

## Directory structure

### Single session example

This is an example of the folder and file structure. Because there is only one session, the session level is not required by the format. For details on individual files see descriptions in the next section:

```
├─ sub-control01/
│  ├─ anat/
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_T1w.nii.gz 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_T1w.json 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_T2w.nii.gz 
│  │  └─ sub-control01_T2w.json 
│  ├─ func/
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_task-nback_bold.nii.gz 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_task-nback_bold.json 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_task-nback_events.tsv 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_task-nback_physio.tsv.gz 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_task-nback_physio.json 
│  │  └─ sub-control01_task-nback_sbref.nii.gz 
│  ├─ dwi/
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_dwi.nii.gz 
│  │  ├─ sub-control01_dwi.bval 
│  │  └─ sub-control01_dwi.bvec 
│  └─ fmap/
│     ├─ sub-control01_phasediff.nii.gz 
│     ├─ sub-control01_phasediff.json 
│     └─ sub-control01_magnitude1.nii.gz 
├─ code/
│  └─ deface.py 
├─ derivatives/
├─ README 
├─ participants.tsv 
├─ dataset_description.json 
└─ CHANGES 

```

## Unspecified data

Additional files and folders containing raw data MAY be added as needed for special cases. All non-standard file entities SHOULD conform to BIDS-style naming conventions, including alphabetic entities and suffixes and alphanumeric labels/indices. Non-standard suffixes SHOULD reflect the nature of the data, and existing entities SHOULD be used when appropriate. For example, an ASSET calibration scan might be named `sub-01_acq-ASSET_calibration.nii.gz`.

Non-standard files and directories should be named with care. Future BIDS efforts may standardize new entities and suffixes, changing the meaning of filenames and setting requirements on their contents or metadata. Validation and parsing tools MAY treat the presence of non-standard files and directories as an error, so consult the details of these tools for mechanisms to suppress warnings or provide interpretations of your filenames.

## BIDS common data types

Each derivative data file SHOULD be described by a JSON file provided as a sidecar or higher up in the hierarchy of the derived dataset (according to the [Inheritance Principle](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/02-common-principles.html#the-inheritance-principle)) unless a particular derivative includes REQUIRED metadata fields, in which case a JSON file is also REQUIRED. Each derivative type defines their own set of fields, but all of them share the following (non-required) ones:

### Examples

Preprocessed `bold` NIfTI file in the original coordinate space of the original run. The location of the file in the original datasets is encoded in the `RawSources` metadata, and `_desc-<label>` is used to prevent clashing with the original filename.

```
└─ sub-01/
   └─ func/
      ├─ sub-01_task-rest_desc-preproc_bold.nii.gz 
      └─ sub-01_task-rest_desc-preproc_bold.json 

```

```
{
    "RawSources": ["sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_bold.nii.gz"]
}

```

If this file was generated with prior knowledge from additional sources, such as the same subject's `T1w`, then both files MAY be included in `RawSources`.

```
{
    "RawSources": [
        "sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_bold.nii.gz",
        "sub-01/anat/sub-01_T1w.nii.gz"
    ]
}

```

On the other hand, if a preprocessed version of the T1w image was used, and it also occurs in the derivatives, `Sources` and `RawSources` can both be specified.

```
{
    "Sources": [
        "sub-01/anat/sub-01_desc-preproc_T1w.nii.gz"
    ],
    "RawSources": [
        "sub-01/func/sub-01_task-rest_bold.nii.gz"
    ]
}

```

## Spatial references

Derivatives are often aligned to a common spatial reference to allow for the comparison of acquired data across runs, sessions, subjects or datasets. A file may indicate the spatial reference to which it has been aligned using the [`space` entity](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/09-entities.html#space) and/or the `SpatialReference` metadata.

The [`space` entity](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/09-entities.html#space) may take any value in [Image-Based Coordinate Systems](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#image-based-coordinate-systems).

If the [`space` entity](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/09-entities.html#space) is omitted, or the space is not in the [Standard template identifiers](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#standard-template-identifiers) table, then the `SpatialReference` metadata is REQUIRED.

### SpatialReference key allowed values

In the case of images with multiple references, an [object](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) must link the relevant structures to reference files. If a single volumetric reference is used for multiple structures, the `VolumeReference` key MAY be used to reduce duplication. For CIFTI-2 images, the relevant structures are BrainStructure values defined in the BrainModel elements found in the CIFTI-2 header.

### Examples

Preprocessed `bold` NIfTI file in `individual` coordinate space. Please mind that in this case `SpatialReference` key is REQUIRED.

```
└─ sub-01/
   └─ func/
      ├─ sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.nii.gz 
      └─ sub-01_task-rest_space-individual_bold.json 

```

```
{
    "SpatialReference": "sub-01/anat/sub-01_desc-combined_T1w.nii.gz"
}

```

Preprocessed `bold` CIFTI-2 files that have been sampled to the fsLR surface meshes defined in the Conte69 atlas along with the MNI152NLin6Asym template. In this example, because all volumetric structures are sampled to the same reference, the `VolumeReference` key is used as a default, and only the surface references need to be specified by BrainStructure names.

```
└─ sub-01/
   └─ func/
      ├─ sub-01_task-rest_space-fsLR_den-91k_bold.dtseries.nii 
      └─ sub-01_task-rest_space-fsLR_den-91k_bold.json 

```

```
{
    "SpatialReference": {
        "VolumeReference": "https://templateflow.s3.amazonaws.com/tpl-MNI152NLin6Asym_res-02_T1w.nii.gz",
        "CIFTI_STRUCTURE_CORTEX_LEFT": "https://github.com/mgxd/brainplot/raw/master/brainplot/Conte69_Atlas/Conte69.L.midthickness.32k_fs_LR.surf.gii",
        "CIFTI_STRUCTURE_CORTEX_RIGHT": "https://github.com/mgxd/brainplot/raw/master/brainplot/Conte69_Atlas/Conte69.R.midthickness.32k_fs_LR.surf.gii"
    }
}

```

Other important specifications can be found in official website. For examples:

## [Preprocessed or cleaned data](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/05-derivatives/02-common-data-types.html#preprocessed-or-cleaned-data)

## [BIDS derivatives](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/05-derivatives/01-introduction.html)

